.TH testprecice 1  "January 18, 2019" "USER COMMANDS"

.SH NAME
testprecice \- runs the test suite of libprecice

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B testprecice [Boost.Test argument] ...

.B testprecice --help

.SH DESCRIPTION
This program is a Boost.test module containing unit tests for the library libprecice.
The test suite consists of parts, run based on the MPI environment they run in.
The majority of the tests require configuration files which are located in the repository.
This program loads these files using the environment variable PRECICE_ROOT.

.TP
.B 1 Rank | No MPI
The base test suite containing unit tests which is always run.

.TP
.B 2 Ranks
The base MPI test suite containing a fraction of MPI tests based on 2 Ranks.

.TP
.B 4 Rank
The extended MPI test suite containing mainly integration tests based on 4 Ranks.

Be aware that the intergration tests will produce a large amount of .log .vtk .vtu and .pvtu files.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --help
Prints boost test help.

.SH RETURN VALUES
Returns a zero exist status if all tests succeeded.
Non zero is returned otherwise.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PRECICE_ROOT
the path of the project root used to access configuration files for the integration tests.
If you installed the debian package, set this to /usr/share/precice .

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B testprecice
Runs the base test suite without MPI related tests
.TP
.B mpiexec -np 2 testprecice
Runs the extended test suite with basic two-rank MPI tests enabled.
.TP
.B mpiexec -np 4 testprecice
Runs the complete test suite.

.SH BUGS
.TP
.B MPIPorts tests fail using OpenMPI
This is due to the non-conformoning implementation of OpenMPI.
Use the following to disable the tests: --run_test="\\!@MPI_Ports"
.TP
.B SocketCommunicationTests fail
This is most likely due to a polluted environment.
Please delete any .address files in the working directory.
.TP
.B TCP/IP related test fail
This occurs on systems without an active network connection.
This bug is safe to ignore.

.SH AUTHOR
Frédéric Simonis (simonis (at) in.tum.de)

.SH SEE ALSO
binprecice(1)
.PP
www.precice.org \- the website of the project
